I'm now going to give you two more example problems of computing.
eigendecomposition of matrices by hand.
Obviously this is on the computer but I encourage you to do these problems by hand and they're not done
in Matlab.
So I guess that's what it means by hand.
So let's get started.
Here is a two by two matrix and you should pause the video go through find the eigenvalues and the eigenvectors
of this matrix so the way we start is by shifting the matrix by Lambda so subtracting lambda from the
diagonal elements setting the determinant equal to zero and then proceeding to compute the determinant
which is also called the characteristic equation of this matrix.
So that works out to be three minus lambda times six minus lambda minus four equals zero and then expanding
these two terms multiplying out these two terms and then collecting the like terms gives us lambda squared
minus nine lambda plus fourteen equals zero and then this expression here can be factored into lambda
minus seven and Lambda minus two and now it's pretty easy to see that the two lambdas that will solve
this equation that solve this equation.
In other words the two eigenvalues of this matrix are plus 7 and plus two.
So that was step one we found the eigenvalues of this matrix and now we go through for each of these
eigenvalues shift the matrix by that amount by that value and then figure out what is a vector in the
shifted matrices null space.
OK so let's start with 2.
So this gives us the matrix 1 1 4 4.
And now we want to find the missing vector here and you've probably guessed it already it is 1 minus
1.
And of course you know that also acceptable would be minus 1 1 or minus quadrillion plus quadrillion.
This vector simply identifies a subspace for the null space of this shifted matrix in any vector that's
in that null space is perfectly fine as an eigenvector.
Now that said the best choice for an eigenvector would be a vector that has a norm of 1 a magnitude
of 1.
And the second best choice would be integer values that are easy to interpret and compact to write like
this.
All right.
So this was for two.
Now we go to the second eigenvalues which was seven and that gives us this matrix minus 4 1 and 4 minus
1.
And here a vector that could work as an eigenvector as a basis for the null space of this shifted matrix
is the numbers 1 4.
So here is the big picture overview we have this matrix and here you see the eigenvalue and its corresponding
eigenvector and the other eigenvalue and the other corresponding eigenvector.
Now your results will be correct.
If you have the correct pairing of eigenvalue and any multiple any scaled version of this vector; it
doesn't matter if you call this lambda one and this V one that's fine because there's no intrinsic ordering.
What matters is that you have the pairing correct.
All right.
So that was the two by two case.
Now let's go for a three by three case.
This one is a little bit more challenging and I have to admit.
So I first came up with these numbers and then I started computing the eigendecomposition.
Now I have to admit that I got stuck on one of the eigenvectors.
I couldn't quite figure it out on my own.
So I used Matlab to compute that
eigenvector.
So what I encourage you to do is find all three eigenvalues by hand and I think it will be pretty obvious
when you start working through it which is the difficult eigenvalue.
So then what you should do by hand is find two of the eigenvectors that you can get basically just by
kind of eyeballing and making some educated guesses.
And then the third eigenvector you can use a computer to solve or you can just wait and watch me come
up with a solution.
All right.
So again we start by shifting this matrix by minus lambda setting the determinant equal to zero and
then proceeding to compute the determinant of this equation and altogether that gives us the characteristic
equation of this matrix.
Now this is a little bit longer.
It's a little bit trickier the arithmetic gets a little bit hairy in particular you end up with this
minus lambda cubed term as well as a couple of multiple terms with Lambda and Lambda squared.
Now once you collect all of these like terms you'll end up with an expression that looks like this.
So it should be minus lambda cubed plus 10 times lambda squared plus eleven lambda equals zero Now something
interesting has happened here all of these terms have a lambda attached to them which means that we
can take a lambda out of each of these terms and rewrite this expression as minus lambda times.
All of this stuff and immediately that tells us that lambda equals zero is a solution.
So when you set this lambda to be zero it doesn't actually matter what's inside this parenthetical statement
that's immediately going to set to make this equation true.
That means that one of the eigenvalues of this matrix is zero and I'm going to have an entire video
just about this phenomenon a little bit later in this section.
But essentially when an eigenvector is an eigenvalue is zero.
It means that the matrix is singular and that you can actually see by looking at this matrix and you
see that column 1 plus column 2 equals column 3 so whenever you have a singular matrix at least one
eigenvalues value is going to be equal to zero.
And in fact the number of eigenvalues that are equal to zero tells you about the rank of this matrix.
More on that in the later video.
Now once you've gotten to this step you can further factor this equation and you end up with the result
that lambda equals zero lambda equals minus 1 and Lambda equals eleven.
So you can probably guess that this is going to be the tricky I can value to compute the corresponding
I can vector of and this is the one that I got a little bit stuck with.
And so I used Matlab as a crutch.
I cheated a little bit.
OK so but let's go through all of these.
So we start with zero and now this is kind of a funny thing because we are shifting the matrix by zero
which actually means we're not changing the matrix at all.
And that means that this matrix A already has a non-trivial null space even without doing any shifting.
So this problem actually boils down to finding a vector in the null space or a basis for the null space.
Even without doing any shifting so based on what I just told you about how do I set up this matrix that
column one plus column two equals column three a basis for the null space is 1 one minus 1.
So you can try for each of these rows the first column plus the second column minus the third column
equals zero all right.
So now let's move on.
So now we shift this matrix by eleven and this is basically where I got stuck and switch to matlab.
So it turns out that eigenvector is nineteen forty one and thirty six.
So if you figured out this I can vector on your own without using a computer then good for you you are
a better or at least more patient mathematician than I am.
And then we get to the third eigenvalue which was minus one.
So now that becomes plus one.
And here is that shifted matrix and this one you should be able to solve on your own.
In fact it's even easier than it looks.
And if you need a hint before I show the answer then the hint is just consider that this third column
is actually pretty useless if you get rid of this third column it becomes really easy to find the
eigenvector in this shifted matrices null space.
So in fact it's one minus one and then zero you just set the third element to be zero.
So that leads us to the big picture overview of the eigendecomposition of this three by three singular
matrix rank 2 matrix we have eigenvalues 0 minus 11 and minus 1.
And these are the corresponding eigenvectors.
And notice I've written them as row vectors and then transpose.
So these are still column vectors we generally always think about eigenvectors as column vectors and
you will learn more about why that is the case in the video on diagonalization, which is coming up soon.